Title: 2023 Year in Review üåé
Date: 2024-01-14
Status: published

I finally had some spare time to sit down and write my year in review. A tad
embarrassing as I read numerous similar posts weeks ago, but better late than
never...

All things considered 2023 was a pretty significant year for me. It was the
first time in my life living abroad for (almost) whole year. My first time
going through a visa approval process, and my first time having to communicate
day to day in a language other than English (Portuguese).

Work wise 2023 was my first experience working full time as a contractor. Which
also meant my first time dealing with adult things like having to file taxes.
Certain things I took for granted as a regular salaried employee are no longer
available. It's only now, looking back where I fully appreciate how much easier
it is to be a regular employee and have all this admin taken care of
automatically. But I guess that's the nature of the game. I'm incredibly
grateful for the opportunity to live and work completely remotely, so it's
absolutely been worthwhile.

---

At the start of the year I set myself a number of goals. I'm pretty happy with
how close I came to achieving each one.


## 1. Read More Books üìö

Last year I managed to keep up my habit of consistent reading, finishing a
total of 29 books (97% of my target). Although I didn't 'technically' reach my
goal I'm going to count this one as a success.

In 2023 I got hooked on a Sci-Fi series ['The Horus
Heresy'](https://wh40k.lexicanum.com/wiki/Horus_Heresy_Series), which I'd
originally started as a teenager. This [non
chronological](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-74J0OQOh0k) series has a
staggering 54 book (at time of writing) so if you want to read about certain
plot lines you can (optionally) pick and choose different books from the
series. 

<div class="ratio ratio-16x9 mb-3">
<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/tVI4Gq-t4Ok" title="How it feels to Read Horus Heresy" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

It's been fun to jump back into a genre I loved when I was growing up, so
reading these is quite a nostalgia trip. To supplement my enjoyment there's a
pretty vibrant online community discussing or producing content related to the
series.

Outside this series I managed to read a number of books on different topics, as
I like to to intersperse the Horus Heresy books with reading non-fiction.
Heading into 2024 like to keep up my reading habit and aim to read a similar
number of books this year.

## 2. Run another half marathon üèÉ

Towards the end of the year I signed up to run in the [BSB City Half
Marathon](https://www.iguanasports.com.br/calendario/2023-bsb-city-half-marathon).
During the lead up to the race I was quite nervous because I hadn't trained as
much as I'd like. Thankfully the first 10k was mostly downhill so I managed to
start off pretty strong.

<figure>
  <img class="figure-img img-fluid mx-auto d-block rounded" src="{static}/images/PXL_20231112_122101957.jpg" alt="Strava screenshot" width="350"/>
  <figcaption class="figure-caption text-center">Me holding my medal after completing the race</figcaption>
</figure>

Towards the 18k mark that things started to fall apart. The combination of hot
weather (40 degree heat), and really steep inclines towards the end really took
its toll on me and other runners. None of the pacemakers (experienced runners
carrying banners/flags aiming for a specific time), appeared to be anywhere
close to their target, and lots of people (me included) were forced to walk.

Consequently I finished in a slightly slower time than I did last year. But all
things considered I'm proud of my achievement to make it around the course. I'm
undecided whether to attempt the same thing again this year, but I won't
pressure myself into having to do another.

## 3. Improve my Portuguese

I think in 2023 I managed to make some decent progress with my Portuguese
speaking and listening. I'm now able to passively learn by consuming
conversation or media and looking up any new words/phrases I've unfamiliar
with.

Often I find myself in denial about my ability to understand a second language
and purposely undersell my abilities. Almost as if by claiming a level of
proficiency I'm opening myself up to criticism or setting myself up for
failure. Despite this lots of Brazilians I meet are quick to compliment my
Portuguese, but I think this is a combination of A) genuine surprise someone is
learning their language and B) simply being polite. 

In social situations I'm able to follow conversation, but often I find myself
unable to contribute. Consequently I spend a lot of time restricted to
listening through of a fear of making mistakes or not having sufficient
vocabulary to express myself. So one of my big aims for 2024 is to try and
practice speaking more in these situations and not be afraid of making
mistakes.

<img class="rounded mx-auto d-block w-50" src="https://i.kym-cdn.com/photos/images/original/002/523/987/a99.jpg" alt="Brazil mentioned"/>

## 4. Consistent Blogging

This again wasn't something I was able to keep consistent, but I'm still happy
with the contributions I made to my blog this year. [A few
articles](https://hn.algolia.com/?q=Jackevansevo.github.io) were cross-posted
to a certain [orange news aggregator
site](https://hn.algolia.com/?q=Jackevansevo.github.io) and generating a
significant amount of traffic and discussion. It was such a bizarre feeling to
see people reading (or glancing at) content that I've written.

Unfortunately, since I swapped out my blog analytics a couple times this year I
only have metrics for one occurrence of this influx of traffic. Can you tell
spot my article was posted:

<img style="width: 75%" class="py-3 rounded mx-auto d-block" src="{static}/images/2023-blog-metrics.png" alt="Strava screenshot"/>

This year I'm planning to focus less on consistency and more on quality,
writing about topics that interest me as and when I'm inspired to do so. I
don't want to feel obligated to write a weekly/monthly post if I'm not in the
appropriate headspace for creative writing. 

## 5. Record a full cover song üé∏

Unfortunately this wasn't something I was able to achieve in 2023. I'll blame
this on not having an appropriate recording setup. This year I've brought my
audio equipment with me so there's a higher chance I might be able to record
some incredibly amateur stuff pretty soon.
