Title: 2023 Resolutions
Date: 2022-12-29
Status: published

Here's five resolutions I'm setting myself for 2023. At the end of this year I
plan to revisit this list and see whether my resolutions were upheld.

To maximise my chances of success I've tried to make each goal as actionable as
possible, as having something concrete to aim for should make them easier to
complete.

## 1. Read more books than 2022 üìö

Last year was a pretty successful year in terms of reading for me, but in 2023 I
intend to read more. Measuring total books is a soft metric as not all books are
made equally, but this seems easily achievable regardless of what books I
choose.

Specifically, I'd like to replace my habit of aimlessly browsing social media on
my phone with focused reading instead. As all the time I've wasted this year
scrolling Twitter / Reddit / Instagram could probably have been better spent
productively.


## 2. Run a(nother) half marathon üèÉ

Back in March I ran my first ever half marathon (see photo). I trained pretty
hard to get to this point and it remains the furthest I've ran in my life.
Getting to this level of fitness was pretty difficult, but incredibly
satisfying, having positive effects on both my mental and physical health.

Recently I've slumped a bit (blame the winter weather) and haven't been running
as frequently. Consequently, next year I'm not focused on beating my previous
time or increasing the distance (although that would be a bonus). The purpose of
this goal is mainly to get me back into the habit of regular running and a
return to my previous fitness level.

<img src="{static}/images/strava7360810133316658810.jpg" alt="Strava screenshot" width="500"/>

## 3. Improve my Portuguese üáßüá∑

In 2022 I spent three months living in Brazil, giving me the opportunity to
fully immerse myself in the language. During which I think my Portuguese really
improved.

By the time I left I was able to understand most basic conversation and
following events on the news. However I still quickly struggle with regular
conversations as soon as it moves past the basics.

So next year I'd like to get better by putting myself into situations where I'm
forced to practice. Especially trying my best not to immediately revert to
English at the first signs of struggles when communicating with bilingual
foreign speakers.

## 4. Write (at least) one blog post a month üìù

This feels like a recurring theme each year. Each year I strive to write more,
but always seem to lack the confidence or motivation. Consequently I've
neglected dedicating much time to writing/blogging in the past.

Next year I'd like to buck this trend and post more frequently. I already have a
backlog of ideas/topics to write about, I just need to commit to writing them
up.

Where appropriate I'll try and cross these articles to link aggregator sites
like Reddit/Lobsters/Hacker News in the hopes that a few people find the content
useful/engaging. But virality, popularity or developing any sort of following is
not my goal.

## 5. Record (at least) one full cover song üé∏

I've been playing guitar for a few years (~4) now, and during the pandemic I
started to semi regularly post small clips of myself playing guitar on
Instagram.

Despite this, I've never had the perseverance to learn, practice and
subsequently record a full cover. In 2023 I'd like to change this.

I'm confident enough to play through quite a few songs completely, I just need
to work up the confidence to bust out a camera and film it.
