Title:⌨️ Durgod HK Venus Review
Date: 2024-03-24
Status: published
Tags: keyboards

Way back in September last yeaer I mentioned I'd been considering purchasing
a new keyboard and dipping my toe back into the world of mechanical keyboards.
Well, in December I purchased a Durgod HK Venus and have been using it ever
since. After a good few months I usage I figured I'd write about my experience.

I'd actually had my eyes on the [Durgod Taurus
K320](https://www.durgodkeyboard.com/durgod-k320-taurus-mechanical-keyboard-cherry-mx-switches-nkro-87-key-gaming-keyboard/),
after seeing it used in [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GrnBXhsr0ng) but it was difficult to
find a UK layout model for a price that I was willing to pay. In comparison
I picked up this HK Venus for a fraction of price: £19.99.

<div id="carouselExampleIndicators" class="carousel slide">
  <div class="carousel-indicators">
    <button type="button" data-bs-target="#carouselExampleIndicators" data-bs-slide-to="0" class="active" aria-current="true" aria-label="Slide 1"></button>
    <button type="button" data-bs-target="#carouselExampleIndicators" data-bs-slide-to="1" aria-label="Slide 2"></button>
  </div>
  <div class="carousel-inner">
    <div class="carousel-item active">
      <img src="{static}/images/PXL_20240303_123514542.MP.jpg" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
    <div class="carousel-item">
      <img src="{static}/images/PXL_20240303_123440665.jpg" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
  </div>
  <button class="carousel-control-prev" type="button" data-bs-target="#carouselExampleIndicators" data-bs-slide="prev">
    <span class="carousel-control-prev-icon" aria-hidden="true"></span>
    <span class="visually-hidden">Previous</span>
  </button>
  <button class="carousel-control-next" type="button" data-bs-target="#carouselExampleIndicators" data-bs-slide="next">
    <span class="carousel-control-next-icon" aria-hidden="true"></span>
    <span class="visually-hidden">Next</span>
  </button>
</div>


<br>

## Build quality

I'm pretty impressed with the build quality of the keyboard, altogether it
feels very well made. Despite its compact size it's quite weighty, so when typing
it doesn't slide around the desk.

I've had issues in the past with previous keyboards where the lettering on the
keys fades over time. It might be too early to judge yet, but so far I don't
notice any letter fading on this new board. However after a few months of usage
the board is showing slight wear on the front metal base plate where some black
coating has worn away to reveal the metal underneath.

The keyboard came packaged with a variety of accessories, including both USB
and USB type C adaptor cables, a key cap remover and a little drinks mat, which
I think was a nice touch.

## Typing Experience

The gateron brown switches feel great to type on and the keys don't seem too
loud (I work from home so noise isn't really a major issue like it would be for
an open office environment).

Unlike previous mechanical keyboards I've owned the case doesn't produce loud
metallic pinging sounds when hammering out the keys. I tend to be a really
heavy handed typist so the lack of 'ping' on this board is a real positive for
me.

When the board is working perfectly (read on) this is the best typing
experience I've had so far. I've had previous experience using Cherry brown
switches but I think the build quality of the board and case construction makes
a huge difference.

## 60% Sacrifices

Perhaps the aspect I least enjoy about this keyboard (which is admittedly my
own fault for purchasing it) is the lack of arrow keys. I'd assumed this would
be fine and there'd be a simple/straightforward way to quickly access these
keys.

Frustratingly in order to emulate an arrow key press you have to toggle the
keyboard into a special mode with Fn1+Caps, then certain keys effectively
become arrow keys. I find the choice of keys (which I've pictured below)
a pretty bizarre choice.

What's frustrating is that once you've switched to the arrow key mode, entered
the combination of keys you need, you then have to toggle back to the 'normal'
mode with Fn1+Caps again. I've found myself in multiple situations where I've
forgotten to do this and wondering why my cursor is moving up when trying to
type the `/` or `?`

I spend a lot of time in the terminal, so I've wired my muscle memory to hit
the up arrow to go back in my shell command history. I've found the lack of
arrow keys on this board really interrupting my workflow.

Some tools I used frequently like `ipython` and `pgcli` (both built using the
same underlying libraries) bind Pg Up and Pg Dn to go forward/back in command
history so I've fallen back to using this where I can.

For regular shell usage I've considering remapping keys to work around this
shortcoming, but instead I've found myself using my terminals built in command
search much more instead.

## Device Support

Plugging this into my Windows PC everything works as you'd expect. I didn't
have to fiddle around with selecting a specific keyboard layout or remap any
keys to get things working.

Unfortunately on MacOS there appears no key layout/mapping that matches this
keyboard layout (Perhaps I'm just looking in the wrong place). I've settled on
using the GB (ABC) layout, but this requires you do have to perform some typing
gymnastics with modifier keys in order to type commonly used symbols in
programming such as `|` and `\` and `~` .

I've learnt to touch type around these issues, but it does make it confusing
when using the same board on MacOS and Windows.



## Connectivity Issues

I'll run into an issue at least once a day where certain keys just stop
working, or a key starts repeating and the rest of the keys become
unresponsive. I've seen [various
threads](https://www.reddit.com/r/MechanicalKeyboards/comments/fl2nq4/does_anyone_have_experience_with_the_durgod_venus/)
online suggesting it's a pretty commonplace issue.

To demonstrate what I mean see the video below:


<div class="ratio ratio-21x9">
<iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/4QRgHiiMdko?si=mrlBL9r4sV7znoeT" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

<br>

The only way I've found to resolve the problem is to unplug the keyboard and
plug it in again.


## Conclusion

This new board is definitely a better overall typing experience that my
previous keyboard, but with some rough usability edges.

Typing is more than just the feel and satisfaction you get from clicky keys. In
achieving a 'nicer' feeling board I've have to suffer through the lack of arrow
keys on a 60%, intermittent connectivity issues and weird key mapping support
on MacOS.

Because I picked up this board so cheaply I don't really have any regrets about
my purchase, but had I paid original retail price I'd be pretty disappointed
after experiencing the issues I've faced.

Consequently I doubt this will be the last keyboard I ever use, and I've
already got my eye on some other models. In particular some of the ergonomic
boards offered by [ZSA](https://www.zsa.io), particularly the [voyager
keyboard](https://www.zsa.io/voyager), but I do wonder if I'd suffer again from
the lack of arrow keys.

<img src="https://res.cloudinary.com/zsa-technology/image/upload/f_auto/q_auto/c_scale,w_1854/v1/zsa-io-refactor-prod/@voyager/images/home/voyager-hero?_a=DATAcJOYZAA0" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
